[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> This is Robert Monroe
speaking from the Monroe
Institute of Applied Sciences.
This is one of a series that has
been released by the Institute
upon the request of many.
Many who believe
that such information
needs to be part of
man's general knowledge.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The following is made up
of material taken directly
from the voice tracks of
"Explorer" sessions held here
at our research facility.
We offer them without
our evaluation or comment
so that you can learn
from them as we did
and form your own interpretation
or analysis of what took place.
The explorer is lying
in total darkness
on a water bed in our
experimental Isolation Booth 2.
The booth itself is well
shielded from RF radiation
and is temperature controlled
and, also, totally soundproof.
The only signal our
explorer can receive
is the audio pattern through
a set of stereo headphones.
We record out of the
booth her aural responses
and her body voltages.
Are explorers, as we call
them, are individuals
who have learned to move into
other states of consciousness
utilizing special
institute methods to do so,
and without the use of drugs
or electrical stimulation.
Most important, each has learned
to comment and report vocally
during such states.
It is the recording
of such commentary,
along with that of the
monitor, that you will hear.
In this case our explorer is
NKH, a new member of the team.
She has reached as a
familiar state of awareness
where her reporting may or
may not be totally her own.
Here it is.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I do not accept that nay
fear-based philosophies.
I have found that
they are all false.
They're all man-made.
And they're all very restrictive
to our personal development.
And this belief in the end of
the world will occur in 2012
is another false
fear-based belief
system that will not occur.
I've been around a while, 35
years, pursuing this quest.
And I remember the same thing
was happening at the year 2000.
I was hearing the
same questions.
Oh, my god, the world's
going to come to an end.
Remember people actually
sold their homes
and went up the mountain tops.
It actually happened.
And, of course,
nothing happened.
And 2012 will be the same.
People forget that the
evolution of consciousness
is a purpose for
the physical world.
And the evolution
of consciousness
is occurring according to plan.
It doesn't mean it's
going to be Utopia.
We as humans, as consciousness,
we grow through drama.
Call it good, bad, or
indifferent, but people,
we create drama for training,
for learning purposes.
It's even the purpose for wars.
People learn through
drama, through conflict.
That's just the state of
consciousness we're in.
But the bottom line is the
evolution of consciousness
is working.
There is an opening.
There is a lot of
spiritual development.
There is a lot of psychological
development occurring
throughout the planet.
And this is not going to
stop in 2012 just because
of some archaic belief system.
I would predict clearly that
nothing will occur in 2012 out
of the norm that already hasn't
occurs on a regular basis--
little earthquake
here, or rains.
I mean that's all part of the
evolution of consciousness.
As long as the evolution of
consciousness is occurring,
there is no reason to stop
the process because we
are evolving through form.
And why would that
system that has
worked for millions
of years, suddenly
stop because of
some belief system?
To me, it makes no sense.
>> I've been taught that
humankind has been evolving.
That in paleolithic
times, we were
essentially living on what we
call the first chakra, that's
survival.
It was also very connected to
the divine, very instinctive,
very basic way of living.
Then we evolved in Neolithic
times up to the second chakra.
This is about fertility.
We began to learn to plant
seeds and grow crops.
It was beginning to take
control of our lives
by being able to provide
food for ourselves when
we needed it.
So we relied less on the
divine and more on ourselves.
Then there was a wave of culture
that came down from the Russian
Steppes into the Middle
East, which is considered
the cradle of civilization.
And it brought in patriarchy.
Neolithic culture
was very egalitarian.
And I wondered how could you
possibly tell that so long ago
that nothing was written?
They tell by what is left in
graves, how the graves were.
So that men and
women were the same.
There didn't seem to be
anybody who was elevated
higher than anybody else.
There were no larger
graves full of more stuff,
like the Egyptian
pyramids, for example.
Their rulers were
considered gods
and they were buried in these
huge pyramids with a great deal
of accoutrement and wealth
to take into their next life
with them.
That's hierarchy.
That came in with patriarchy
thousands of years
ago when the Neolithic
cultures were
decimated over a period
of about 2,000 years.
They were just wiped out.
That was the end of
egalitarian living.
Now we have patriarchy
and hierarchy.
I think with 2012 coming, we
are shifting we are moving up
to the heart chakra.
We are going from a
power, a place of power
over, win-lose, we're
going to be moving up
to heart, to win-win.
So there isn't going to be
the same kind of struggle.
That whatever we do, we
do for the good of all,
not just for ourselves.
And that involves clearing ego.
Living in this third
chakra has been ego driven,
caring for me first, me only.
I got to take care of
myself, nobody else will.
Up to trust, faith,
belief in love.
And if we all love
one another, we
want the best for
one another, we're
going to be moving
to a different level
of consciousness.
So I think that 2012
is the end of an era.
It is at the end of
life as we knew it.
Doesn't mean the Earth's
going to blow up.
It doesn't mean that we're going
to be wiped out by an asteroid.
The Mayan calendar ends in 2012.
That's the end of a
period of life structure.
>> I think there are so
many traumatic things going
on on the planet right now.
It's 2008.
Think about it.
What more drastic can happen
in the next four years?
We're going to have some
more physical storms,
are part of Armageddon.
Mother Earth is shaking
off a lot of the old stuff.
We're going to have some more
disasters like that, I'm sure.
It's going to be up to the
planet as a whole to help
the people who get in trouble.
I mean we saw what happened
with Hurricane Katrina.
We saw that we didn't
mobilize as well as we should
have to help those people.
We saw what happened
with the tsunami.
Other things like
this are happening.
These are all part of the
upheaval of the planet
and it's up to us
as humans to do
what we can to help every
single person on this planet.
And I believe we are
in the midst of it.
So the year itself,
I don't think
is going to be as traumatic,
as shocking, as we think it is.
I think it's a process
rather than a one event
kind of a deal.
Either way, it's
going to be fine.
>> I think that there is
some kind of a shift that is
happening in terms
of consciousness.
Just the simple fact
that it's becoming
more of our conversation.
And consciousness itself is
becoming a very, very hot
topic, not just in
science, but in general.
So I think there is a shift.
And from my own
personal experience,
I have found a shift of--
as I was a trainer, when
I first started training,
and even when I first started
coming here as a participant,
the groups and the type of
people who are coming here
seem to hold a
greater wisdom, maybe,
or a greater maturity
that from my perspective
has been pretty profound.
So, yeah, I think
there is some kind
of a change that's happening.
What it is or what
its dimensions are
or whether the world's going
to end in 2012, I don't know.
All I know is that whatever
happens between now
and then, we've got
a lot of work to do.
And the work that we do
here is very significant.
And I think that if
something really dramatic
happens in 2012, the type
of work that we do here
can't help but
prepare us for that.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> If you're going
to communicate,
you have to start
where they are.
To communicate with you, I've
got to start where you are.
I've got to start with your
beliefs, your understanding,
and your sense of reality
and work with that.
I can't start from
where I am because it
won't make any sense to you.
So that's a challenge to
communicate with people.
And it's a challenge to maintain
an image of being rational so
that people will
actually listen to you.
How do you get more people
to experience and think?
Well, you, obviously,
have to get exposure.
Right?
You have to be in a documentary.
You have to go give lectures.
You have to get exposure.
And the more exposure
you get, the more
you run the risk of being
crazy, of people running you off
because your ideas are too
far out beyond where they are.
And in doing those
challenges, you meet people
and you interact.
You give it your best shot.
And then you accept
what happens afterwards.
[AIRPLANE LANDING]
>> Our guest today, we were very
pleased to have with us Thomas
Campbell who has a brand
new book out, a very,
very expensive book.
Now I will warn our
listeners in advance
that what we're
going to talk about
will barely dent the surface
of what Tom talks about
in his book.
Let's take a moment, talk out
sort of start at the beginning.
I kind of have an idea that
it began in your childhood.
>> When I was very young--
I'm guessing maybe
six, seven years old--
I had what I learned later to
call out-of-body experiences.
I wouldn't know that
term at that time.
A presence, you might
say an entity, came to me
and basically helped
me get out of body,
then taught me how
to do it myself.
And I went through a series
of probably a couple of years
where this was a nightly thing.
>> It is Intuitive Soul Radio
with your host Laurie Huston.
Well, we have a
special show today
with a very unique and
distinguished guest
which is Thomas Campbell.
And Thomas is a nuclear
physicist, as well as
he's written a book on
consciousness called "My Big
TOE."
So I'm going to go back to
some of the main concepts
that we talked about in our
last interview last week, really
just to expand on.
Because some of our
listeners, including myself,
may not have been as aware of
some of your major concepts
which is about consciousness,
data, and metaphors.
You know, I thought
about, OK, so I've
heard that our eyes
don't actually see
and our ears don't
actually hear.
It's really the input that
goes to our brain that
allows us to see and to hear.
And so, in that
sense, that's data.
Is that correct?
>> That is correct.
Think of yourself
as a consciousness
that is receiving a data
stream of information.
And that information
defines for you
your reality, what you see
and hear and smell and touch.
And the best analogy
you kind of get a grip--
this is something that's very
hard to get an intuitive feel
for--
but the best analogy is a
computer simulation game.
And think of it in
the same way as that.
We're the characters in this
computer simulation game.
There you have lots
of people interacting.
They see things.
They do things.
They interact.
And when they go up and interact
with whether it's other player
or whether it's a
monster, things happen.
It's all an interactive thing.
And there's rules.
In these games, they
tend to be violent games.
So the rules are how many whacks
can you take before you die
or how many hit
points and how much
this and how much
that and magic spells.
And all of these are
part of their rules.
But it's just a rule set.
And it creates a world.
Well our world is
very much like that.
Think of consciousness as
the fundamental reality.
We are consciousness.
Period.
Consciousness is digital.
So it deals with data.
Data with rules
creates realities.
This is our reality.
Physics is the rule set.
Look at this reality
the way you would look
at a multiplayer computer game.
World of Warcraft or EverQuest,
there's a dozen of them
out there, and there's
thousands of players.
And they have characters.
And the characters go
where they tell them to go.
But there's also
things they interact
with that are part of the set.
And it's all digital.
OK?
It's a virtual reality.
Well, that's the same sort
of thing that our reality is.
This physical reality
is a virtual reality.
And it is based on information
just as that World of Warcraft
is based on information.
It's information 1s and
0's traveling around
in that server that makes all
those people do what they do.
And they have their
battles and they
go through a lot of actions,
interact, gain experience.
>> But at some point
in that interaction,
there must be
discreet interaction.
And what I'm asking is
what determines the outcome
of those discrete interactions?
>> What determines the
outcome is free will.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
That's another part
of consciousness.
You cannot have consciousness
without free will.
They go together.
They're a matched set.
It's like the heads and
tails of the same coin.
You can't have a front
side without the back side.
Now, if you have
free will, you have
to be able to go both ways.
You have to be able to make
good decisions and bad decisions
or you wouldn't have free will.
So it's up to us.
And you can take a few steps
forward and a few steps
backward, and you
hope that in the end,
there is more forward
than there is backward.
And then you're making progress.
But it's not just
a simple thing.
Maybe we should step
back a bit and say
that this system that
I'm calling the larger
system of reality, of which
this physical reality is
a subsystem, this larger
system is consciousness.
So then dot dot dot, we'd
end up with consciousness is
a digital information system.
OK.
Now, in order for
consciousness to evolve,
it evolves towards
states of lower entropy.
Now your listeners may
not understand that,
but it evolves toward states
of greater capability,
let's put it that
way, less randomness.
So there's lots of these
units of consciousness, which
we'll call entities or beings.
They come in all
sizes and shapes.
Now of course sizes
is a physical word.
There's no size
to consciousness.
There's not a big consciousness
and a little consciousness.
But there are consciousness
that have a lot of data and not
so much data.
And there's
consciousness who have
their data very well
organized and have a lot
of real information in there.
And consciousness
that have data that's
kind of scrambled and noisy
and not very coherent.
And we measure that
coherency of the data
that forms a consciousness
in terms of entropy.
Entropy is a science word.
It's really a physics
word from thermodynamics
that talks about
things being ordered
and things being useful in
their ability to do something,
have some kind of action.
So if you have a
lot of entropy, that
means you have a
lot of disorder.
It's a measure of disorder.
If you have very low
entropy, then you
have things that are ordered.
So if you had a whole bunch of
random letters of the alphabet
all in a pile, that would
be a high entropy system.
If you take them
and arrange them
some way that it spells
something meaningful to you,
then that's a much
lower entropy system
because there's order
now been put to it.
So if you have
something like a body,
a body is more
ordered because it
has all kinds of cells that
have very specific things to do.
So it's a very ordered thing.
Or a crystal that grows in a
very particular way, that's
ordered.
Those things have lower entropy.
Things that have
high entropy are
things like your child's room.
They always have high entropy.
Certainly my child's room
had a lot of high entropy.
Things were very disordered.
You know, vapors, things that
just move around randomly,
they have very high entropy.
So we talked about entropy
in terms of systems.
A system has entropy.
And a low entropy
consciousness is love.
When consciousness
is very low entropy,
it's not that it is
loving, it is love.
That's the definition of love,
a low entropy consciousness.
Because when love is
what the being is, then
that being is basically as
useful and as helpful and as
interactive and as
positive, it can do a lot.
It has a lot of ability to
do work, to change things.
And how we interact
with each other,
how we interact with the
set, the physical world,
gives us opportunities
to make decisions.
And those decisions
reflect our intent.
And if that intent is a
positive, is a good intent,
is an intent toward
love, then we evolve.
If the intent is in the
opposite direction, we devolve.
So we're here to
experience, to interact.
It's kind of a
place to mix it up.
It allows us to make
those decisions that
exercises our intent
which will help us either
evolve or devolve.
>> Love gives me a
feeling of expansion.
It gives me, really, a
feeling of elevation, of lift.
I feel open.
I feel happy.
I feel connected to other
people, to all beings.
Fear and hatred are contracting.
They're dense.
They're heavy.
They're dark.
I retreat into myself
and to worry about me.
So there's a huge
impact on my body.
And I believe that that
really affects your health.
>> Feelings of love
speed up your vibration.
They raise your light quotient.
They increase your energy field.
Feelings of peace and love
bring you the greatest power
that you can have.
>> When we move into
a place of love,
when we move into a place
of higher vibration--
and it's not a judgment thing,
it's not positive and negative.
It's just a higher vibration.
Just like sound,
you have low sounds
and you have high sounds--
when you move into
a place of love,
you're moving into the
higher sound frequencies
that are healing, that
can change so many things.
What it comes down
to is the vibration.
We can change our
vibrations consciously.
We can have our vibrations
changed by other people.
When you move into
a room and somebody
is in an absolute state of joy
and happiness, it lifts us.
When you move into
a room and somebody
is filled with anger and
hate, it brings us down.
We feel that shift.
>> Anything that is
heavy and negative, if--
in my belief-- you
don't deal with it
when it is on a vibrational
level like a thought
or an emotion, those
are much easier
to deal with and correct when
they are on an energetic level.
If you don't pay
attention to them
and you allow that
density and that heaviness
to stay in your body, it winds
up affecting you physically.
>> But fear is the
opposite of love.
So if we are trying
to grow toward love,
then fear is what's taking
us in the opposite direction.
And this doesn't have to be
fear like scream and run away.
This is fear of not
measuring up, fear
of not being good
enough, insecurities,
all these things are fear,
fear of not being lovable,
fear of not being competent.
So it's not just
fear of bodily harm.
It doesn't have to be a monster.
The fear is mainly the monsters
inside that you're afraid of.
>> Fear is a big
block of humanity.
We are all in our own box.
And that box is fear.
We all have our own
little comfort zone.
But we're all in a box.
I'm no different.
My box is just a
little different.
But we're all in our
own self-made box,
culturally molded,
but we accepted it.
And everybody's
like how far are you
willing to extend beyond
your little fear barrier?
Every time you do something
that makes you uncomfortable,
that stretches you,
you're starting
to break through that barrier.
Anxiety is the
walls that you feel.
When we feel
anxiety in our life,
we're pressing
against that barrier.
Every fear that we have has to
be overcome in the physical.
As a matter of fact, if you have
a fear, you have to overcome it
or you just take it with you.
>> Well, we're here
to learn, to grow,
to evolve the quality
of our consciousness.
That's our point and
purpose for being here.
We are part of a larger
consciousness system.
That system is evolving.
And we are evolving
as pieces of it.
So we're here to
grow up basically.
What's the purpose for
a tiger in the woods?
What's the tiger's purpose?
Well, it evolves right?
And it grows.
It lives.
It interacts.
It learns.
It does the same thing.
What's anything's purpose?
Your purpose is to evolve,
to continue, to do better,
to find better ways of being.
That's where we are.
>> This is a virtual reality
field that's very believable.
I mean it's incredible
invention this earth plane.
I mean we believe
we're physical.
We believe we're mammals.
I mean it's really
everything that we
believe about ourselves is
totally alien to what we truly
are.
But yet it's convincing.
Here, I'm a human man.
I'm a father.
I'm a writer.
I'm none of these things
at soul, of course.
All of that is an illusion.
The point is it's
a virtual reality
field where we learn and grow
through personal experience.
And to be effective, we learn
by not only through school,
we learn by being.
>> The intellect is a
weak player in this game.
And growth has to be
from the inside out.
It's not something that
somebody will explain to you.
Oh, you shouldn't be afraid.
Let go of your fear.
Well, those things are easy
to say, but very hard to do.
It has to be something that
comes up from inside of you.
It has to come
from a deep level.
You have to, basically, grow
up, which means change yourself.
You have to be different.
It's not a matter
of acting different.
Acting different is maybe
a first step, sometimes,
toward being different.
And sometimes it's not a
first step to anywhere.
You're just acting,
you're playing a role.
But you have to change yourself.
And it starts with
the will to change.
It starts with the ability
to see what's going on.
To be aware that it's fear.
To be aware of the
source of that fear,
and then to have the courage
to step right into that fear
and deal with it rather than
use devices to avoid it.
>> One of the reasons that we
have this virtual reality where
the biology is such that we
die is that we go through this
learning period.
We get to a point where the rate
of learning maybe slows down.
Maybe we've learned
about all we're
capable of learning this time.
You get that been there done
that feeling and you're no
longer maybe as open
minded as you were.
So it's harder to
get new concepts in.
It's harder to think out of
the box, that kind of stuff.
Well, at that point, if you
just keep on keeping on,
that gets to be
not so productive.
So you want a system that
every so often pulls you out
of the classroom, lets you
evaluate what you're learning,
lets you see where you're
going and what your errors are
and what you need to do better.
Program, plan, another
learning session, and then
go back and do it again.
That's a whole lot more
effective than just learning,
in just one straight long thing.
Because when you do that,
everything you do next
is based on what you did before.
You don't get any
fresh starts that way.
It's hard to get out of the box.
>> The soul can take
on any shape, any form,
needed to learn and
grow and evolve.
And that's what we
are all doing here,
taking on a humanoid form to
learn, and to grow, and evolve,
.
and then exit that
old form and move on.
>> If you understand
your consciousness,
then you're not the body.
You're something
other than the body.
That the body is
really just virtual.
It's a set of rules
to give you experience
so that you can evolve.
That's basically what it is.
Now your virtual body
isn't any more alive
than the virtual body on
that television screen
or that computer screen
in your virtual game.
It's just a virtual body.
Now, it abides by
biological rules.
So it grows.
It gets bigger.
It gets potbelly.
Your hair gets white.
You get old.
You die.
So those things happen because
that's part of the rule system.
But it's just a virtual body.
In those video games, you can
change your body sometimes.
So some of those characters
can change themselves
into leopards and horses.
And they can change their body.
Or they can just go
get another character
and play that character.
Well, it's sort of like that.
So this reality is
a virtual reality.
But, say, when Uncle Fred dies
and he's in that other reality,
that's a virtual reality, too.
That's not the reality.
It's not well we
have the physical one
and the nonphysical one in
there that Uncle Fred's in,
that's the real reality.
It's not like that.
That's just another
virtual reality.
Now there is a rule set there.
There's a physics there.
There are things you can
do and can't do there.
And it has its own purpose.
And the purpose is
basically the same
in that it's to help
consciousness evolve,
because that's the name
of the game that we're in.
Now if you are at a very
low level of evolution,
your consciousness
is high entropy,
you go out, Yeah,
Yeah, you jump back in.
There's not a lot of
planning or whatever,
because really all you need to
do at that point is just get
experience.
You're new.
You just need to get experience.
So that, there's not much.
If you are a more evolved,
and by that I just
mean a lower entropy
consciousness,
then you're more particular.
You take some time, and
you say, well, you know,
I'm really having
trouble with greed,
or I'm really having trouble
with this part of ego and fear
and things.
And what I need is a
situation like this,
because that would really give
them the opportunity to learn.
That would just kind of
draw me out in that area.
So you make plans of what
it is you'd like to do.
One of the ways you know
what your problems are
is that you get
to see and review
what you did in that life.
So you do get a review.
And it's not a review
that somebody sits down
and makes you watch
everything that you did.
But as you interact
with these people,
and these are really
facilitators, if you will,
and you claim that
something that
isn't really true
like well, you know,
I didn't have any ego in
that life, dah duh, dah duh,
dah duh.
Then they'll say well, look.
And basically, like
on a big video screen,
they run the movie.
And there you are taking
advantage of somebody,
doing some other kind of thing.
And eventually they do that
enough that you get the idea.
All right.
Yeah.
I see my problem.
But what about this?
And they'll show you
something about that.
So after you've
done this enough,
it's not they make
you do a whole review,
they just use it
as a tool to help
you understand what
your problems are,
where you need growth.
Then they may suggest something
if you're at a lower level
and send you back.
Or you may plan with them
what you want to do next.
And you may plan with them who
you want to do it with next.
And in very specific
situations that you think
would be meaningful to you that
would really help you grow.
Who's they?
OK.
They are entities, just
like we are entities.
Except their focus is
in the nonphysical.
Again, that's everything
that isn't physical.
Everything that isn't in
our universe is nonphysical.
So they're in the
nonphysical, which
is all kinds of
virtual realities
are in the nonphysical.
But I'm just lumping
them all together.
So they are aware
in the nonphysical
like we're aware
in the physical.
And part of the jobs they
have, service that they have,
is to help us make
those transitions.
They can also be
referred to as guides.
It's just other
entities that aren't
physical with which
you communicate
and who are helpful.
These guides aren't
perfect people.
They're also
learning and growing.
The whole system is
You've got to think
of it as a system.
If you think of it
as a supreme being,
that's taking what we
know here in the physical
and just translating it there.
Well, here we're a
monkey and there we're
a bigger super monkey.
It's not like that.
It's different.
It's a system of consciousness.
And like all systems, like
think of our ecosystem,
it's got its niches.
It's got different
kinds of things that are
in it, its different spaces.
It's got self-balancing
mechanisms
that evolve together
to all contribute
to the success of the whole.
Well, that's the way
our ecosystem works.
Right?
Everything's interconnected.
That's the way the
system works, too.
It's a consciousness.
And So all the pieces have
evolved to interact and help
each other.
They all have niches.
This helps this level.
That level helps the next level.
And it all works together.
It's a big system.
So try not to impose your
physical concepts of things
being individual, people doing
things, it's not like that.
It's a consciousness system.
It's more like a big ecosystem.
There is like leadership roles.
It's benign.
It's not the idea of the god
sitting on his throne playing
with his pet people.
Oh, I'm going to change
that and I will do this.
It's not that kind of a thing.
So sometimes people ask me, they
say well, doesn't this being,
isn't he aware of
everything and everybody?
And well he can be
But he's aware of you
and I like you and I
are aware of our liver.
Right?
Well, are you aware
of your liver?
Sorta.
You're not really in an active
kind of relationship to it.
You know if something major
has gone wrong with it,
you may try to have it fixed.
You've got a big system.
And the system's self-balancing.
If something happens
to kind of unbalance it
or a problem happens, then
attention gets drawn there.
And it kind of get fixed.
And it goes on.
That's the way all
big systems work.
Corporations are big systems.
They work like that.
The corporation hums along.
The CEO doesn't know what's
going on in the mailroom.
He doesn't really care what's
He knows he has a mailroom
and that mail comes in
and the mail goes out.
And that's really all
he has to know about it.
It's not like he has
to monitor everything
that happens in the mailroom.
It just goes on.
It's part of the system.
It evolves.
That mailroom may grow
bigger or shrink or whatever
by the needs of the company.
And it may evolve to meet the
needs of the company, whatever
they are.
As the company changes,
the mailroom changes.
But taking care of the
mailroom is not what he does.
That's not what the CEO does.
He's got a bigger
picture than that.
And he doesn't deal with that.
He can.
If that suddenly becomes
the break point and they're
not getting their checks on
time because the mailroom is not
getting them out or getting
them in or something.
Then maybe the CEO goes
down to the mailroom
to see what's going on.
>> As you get lower entropy,
the number of choices you have
and the things that
you can do increases.
Again, low entropy
means a greater ability
to make change, a greater
ability to do work.
That's part of the
definition of entropy.
So you may be working
as a guide or helping
people do those transitions
and still have a body here.
You can be doing both.
Or have two bodies here.
Things get more
accessible to you,
the lower entropy you have.
If you are very beginning
in this evolution thing,
you don't do that.
You pop in.
You pop out.
You're one place at one time,
you're not parallel processing.
It's just a matter of
parallel processing.
So you can be conscious
in several reality frames
at the same time.
And even your consciousness
here can be trained to do that.
Sometimes it is
the people here who
are acting in those
roles as helpers.
Sometimes there
are people here who
are operational in that reality,
given the job to do that,
because you have to understand
how the human mind works.
You have to understand there
are attachments to the reality
and the transition problems.
If you come from another
reality system that
doesn't have any of
that, then you're
not going to be very
helpful to these people.
So, yes, people
who have experience
here are much better at
helping in a transition
at being guides.
It's not necessary.
Sometimes you will get a guide
that has no experience here.
They have experience
other places.
But most of them do have
experience in virtual realities
that are physical because
that's the best place to learn.
But, mostly, yes, they have
experience here because that
makes them more valuable
teachers and helpers.
And often they nudge us in
ways that we need to go.
They give us little nudges.
Show us things that kind
of help open our minds.
We are in individuated
consciousness.
And part of that consciousness
is engaged in this game.
Now, you say, well,
how is that part of it?
Well, if you were
playing a video game
of a virtual reality,
part of your consciousness
would be focused on that game.
But that doesn't
mean you couldn't
go up and make a trip
to the refrigerator
to get something to drink.
Part of that consciousness is
doing other things as well.
Part of that consciousness
knows that you
should be doing your
homework instead
of playing the video game.
But you multiprocess
in different levels
as consciousness all the time.
Well, this is just one
level of our consciousness.
>> I got the more I let
go of my resistances
and my misconceptions, the
more I feel that I'm not alone,
that there is always presence
with me that's helpful.
I have a grandson who, as
soon as he was able to talk,
told his mother that
angels don't have bones.
Angels don't have bones.
He was very insistent about it.
Then, when he got a
little more verbal,
he told her that when she
was little and she was sad,
he would come and play
with her and cheer her up.
He remembered being an angel.
That's phenomenal to
me, just phenomenal.
I don't see them.
His brother does.
His younger brother can
tell you, yes, there's
an angel over there.
And he can describe it to you.
So people see things
that I don't see.
I accept it on faith.
I trust them.
I believe what they tell
me, especially children.
And here are these
two little guys
who can say, yes, I see it.
It's right over there.
So they're there.
Though I may not be
physically aware,
I have a sense of comfort and
companionship that tells me
that there is more
here than I can see.
>> This is not a
graduate school.
This is, at least, an elementary
school, if not a preschool.
This is a place where
young consciousness
learns the rudimentary facts
of being, the ways to be.
And this is not a place where
all of us, advanced people.
Everybody here thinks
they're advanced.
You know that's
just the way it is.
But that's not the case.
We're all struggling in
an elementary school.
Trying to figure this out.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
May stop coming here
because this learning
lab is good for certain
sorts of things.
And you can kind of
use it up to where
it's like you don't have
to go back to third grade.
You don't need that.
So, yes, you may graduate
from this reality frame.
But there's others.
And there's other challenges,
other things to do.
There's other ways
of giving back.
There's other
services to perform.
It's not like that's the end.
Now you go sit on your cloud.
You've earned it.
It's not that way.
The system itself is evolving.
Not only are you evolving, but
the whole system is evolving.
The whole consciousness
thing is not a static thing.
>> It's expanding,
I write about this.
The universe is not stagnant.
It's an expanding process.
And it's always something
new, always something greater.
So I'm looking forward to
exploring many new realities
even beyond
form-based realities.
And I think there
is no and as such.
There is no final
destination as such.
Because I think as soul,
our whole purpose as soul
is to expand exponentially
into infinity.
I think that's what we are.
We're consciousness
that has no limits.
And with no limits, we can
expand in any direction,
into any form, into
any aspect we choose.
Even when we evolve
beyond the humanoid
and beyond the astral plane,
and we go beyond thought forms,
and we go beyond all form-based
realities, which eventually we
will evolve beyond.
Even then there will
be new vistas for us
to conquer that's way beyond
our form-based realities.
It just is beyond
anything we can
think of in our current state.
But there is an exciting,
never-ending future,
I feel, or, let's just say
present available for all
of us.
>> Much of our communication
is not verbal--
like you and I are now
doing this verbally--
but much of our communication
with other people is
non-verbal.
And I don't mean body language.
I mean non-verbal in
a telepathic sense
where we share information.
The New Age community,
it's vibes, right?
You get good vibes or bad vibes.
But it's the same thing.
It's just we trade.
And it's those vibes and that
nonphysical communication
is why when you are very
positive, positive things begin
to happen around you because
that's what you're tuned into,
that's what you're
focused on, that's what
you accept in your reality.
The other stuff that
otherwise you would find that
would be cold and prickly,
you don't relate to it.
It just passes by.
It's like an unpleasant
event that doesn't touch you
because you no longer
interpret that as, oh, no,
how could they do that to me?
You've grown past that.
So now, it's just there.
And oh, that's
just the way it is.
And it goes by.
And it's not prickly
or cold anymore.
So it's by changing yourself.
Suddenly the world gets
better, not because you
change the world but because
you're reinterpreting
the world differently.
>> What I do impacts everything.
And it does matter
if I cut down a tree.
if I blow up rocks.
I'm having an impact.
I'm impacting an entire system.
Just because I can't see that
the trees have consciousness
doesn't mean that they don't.
So even though I
can't see it, I am
becoming more and more willing
to trust that everything
is interconnected and that
what I do and what I believe,
even what I think, has an
effect on other people.
>> People may find that as
they start to listen to that
internal voice, that they will
start to do things that are
more in line with their felt
sense of purpose and meaning.
And so they may change careers.
Or they may change
relationships.
Or they may move to an
environment that is more
conducive for who they are.
They might start
maybe doing artwork
that they put off
all of their lives
or thought they
never had time for
or start to write or to explore
something that maybe they
had only dreamed of before.
I think that in a
lot of cases, people
start to move more in
line with their dreams.
Whereas in the past, they might
have felt constrained because
of others' expectations or
societal expectations or job
expectations, and they
could never find the courage
to make the change that
they knew at some deep level
they needed to make.
And I think more
often than not, people
who do this will
start to work to bring
those changes into
the lives and to also
move more consciously
in the whole journey
of self-transformation.
>> I think the soul is an
aspect of the divine, however,
you want to hold that
concept in your mind.
Whether it's God, Allah,
Spirit the universe, greater
intelligence.
Whatever concept you hold,
I think each one of us
is a piece of that.
And that is inherently perfect.
We spend our entire lives
learning and growing
and finding our way
back to oneness.
I think that's the driving
force in all of us all the time.
Whether we know it or
not, we are seeking union
with the divine.
And I think it's our soul
that is urging us back
to be part with
the divine again.
>> Kindness is of the
utmost importance.
Kindness is everything.
It's what everyone really wants.
Kindness can have many faces.
But that is the most
important thing in the world.
I say this because I feel
like it is so important
and we don't realize it.
And we always see
our limitations.
And we always see our deficits.
But the truth is we're whole.
>> You can be the individual
that had all those experiences.
You can be all those individuals
that had those experiences.
And you can still be
a part of the whole
to where you have a larger
awareness over anything else.
It's true that
you do become more
integrated with everything.
But you're doing that
now as you're growing.
It's not like you have to
wait to you get enlightened.
As you grow, and get a
bigger and bigger picture,
you become more
connected to everything.
You start having a
bigger view of the world.
>> I was trying to wrap
my head around this--
how can we all be one--
years ago.
And the image that I
became comfortable with
was imagining that the whole,
the universe, god, whatever you
want to call it is the ocean.
It's all there is is everything.
And there are all of
these waves in the ocean.
Each one is separate,
distinct, and unique,
but can't be separated
from the whole.
So part of my soul's journey is
coming to that understanding,
is learning, and being
able to incorporate
in my being more and
more the understanding
that I'm not separate.
I am part of the whole.
You are part of the whole.
And that we really are one.
>> Well, the more you grow up,
the more effect you can have
and make things happen so if
you're a very grown person,
then you can have a
very large effect.
Now that effect could be that
you do paranormal things or you
heal somebody.
It could mean that
you travel around
and interact with beings
all over the place.
Or it could mean that you're
just a darned good example.
And everybody that's around you
just feels so calm and so nice
that wherever you go, you
have this effect, just
by being there.
People interact with you and
they like you right away.
Matter of fact, they even act
better when they're around you.
They even make better choices.
You're a good example.
You help them see
a better way to go.
Well, that's having
a big effect.
>> Generally speaking, if
you think back to the planet
and the evolution of
life on the planet,
it took a couple of billion
years for life to emerge from
the primordial nothingness.
And then scientists
that looked back
over huge long
scales of time talk
about decimal pointing things,
meaning in 10 year increments.
So it took about a
million years for life
to emerge from unicellular
to multicellular.
And then it took about
half a million years
to go from that to vertebrates.
Things that had skeletons.
And then going from that to Homo
erectus, the idea of emerging
from the seas and
back into the seas
to some sort of something
that resembled a body,
we're looking at 50,000 years.
Another decimal point
off of that 5,000 years,
we think of the formations
of societies among this
some of this Homo
erectus survived.
And the first
thing that we might
call as humanoids and the
formation of societies
5,000 years ago.
500 Years ago was the
Industrial Revolution.
50 years ago, the
Informational Revolution.
We're running out
of decimal points.
What is human kind
evolving into?
And we think it
is consciousness.
What does that mean?
It means that mankind,
humankind, sees itself
differently.
We're talking about
maybe, if it's 50 years,
and we go from
1980-2030 maybe will
humankind perceive of
themselves as being
different than we do now?
Is the beginning of
this awakening something
to do with this 2012
conceptual notion?
I mean we can look
back in history,
and these things, I talked
about in terms of evolution
over billions, then millions,
then hundreds of thousands,
and then hundreds and then
decades, they're all there.
Those are facts.
That happened.
And when we stand here and
look the other direction
in this thing called time that
doesn't exist, what's next?
A philosophic question if we
can go to Rupert Sheldrake
and formative causation.
The classic story that's
told in formative causation
is of the hundredth
monkey that they have.
Teaching monkeys to wash food.
And then they teach
their children.
And they teach their
associative colonies of monkeys.
And there is some point at
time a threshold, suddenly, all
over the world, all
monkeys wash their food.
Now if we could ask
a question, if we
could put a microphone
under the monkey's mouth
and say do you remember when
you didn't wash your food?
It would be interesting
to know what
the answer to that question is.
When we evolve as human kind
to become aware of ourselves
differently will we say, oh,
I remember when we were really
stupid?
Or will we say it's
always been this way,
I just didn't realize it?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> What is retirement
after this life?
And is it really different?
I still have a
rich, active life.
Yeah, I didn't go off and
do something different.
I'm still kind of the same guy.
Integrating life
experiences when
you're 70 years old as
opposed to when you're
30 or 40 years old,
there's certainly
a different
perspective on things,
but certainly a
great deal of respect
for what I grew up in to be.
I sort of grew up in this genre
of consciousness from day one.
And I got involved in that work
when I had my military career
and stepped into it here.
And it broadened in scope.
And it's continued to widen
with my maturity and time
on my hands, not doing all
those administrative things.
>> We're sitting in my
stepfather and mother's home,
Roberts Mountain Retreat.
And, actually, we give programs
up here, our graduate programs.
And the fullness that I feel
being able to offer to people
now-- as the director of
the Institute once again,
and I did this many
years ago also--
to offer them the possibility
of having such peak experiences
with getting a totally
different view,
being able to look at
their belief systems,
being able to see a far broader
way of being than they ever
thought possible, seeing more of
themselves than they ever knew
existed, getting beyond
limiting beliefs.
By doing that, you also
get beyond a lot of fear.
And so, in doing, so
your life is enriched.
Then you can use it
very pragmatically.
It's not all about being
at one with the universe.
That's part of it.
But how about using
that for better problem
solving and decision making
and connecting with each other
and seeing the beauty
in another person.
See, this is how I feel that
by learning all this stuff
or talking about how do
we evolve, well, just pay
attention.
It's like that Bhagavan
Das, "Be here now."
It's really true.
>> There's been a tremendous
amount of changes in my life
since 2008.
For the last five years, I've
been doing my six day workshop
at the Monroe Institute
called OB OBE Intensive, which
has been just a joy to do.
It's just a great experience.
And in 2011, I
had the experience
of having throat
cancer, which was
a life changer in many ways.
It was a very quick event that
occurred, actually, while I
was doing one of my workshops.
Literally, I had a large
lump appear in my throat,
in my neck.
And it isn't till
after the workshop
I got the diagnosis that I had
stage 4 cancer of the lymph
nodes and tonsils.
After dealing with it
and successfully battling
the cancer, and
being healed from it,
it set my course a
little bit differently.
And I became much
more interested
in the whole concept, the
process of death and dying,
and the afterlife.
And that's why I
wrote my latest book.
"Adventures In the Afterlife"
is a result of my personal trial
that I endured with cancer.
Before, I was totally interested
in out-of-body experiences.
Actually for 20 years,
that was my total focus.
And my writing focus was
on out-of-body experiences.
But after having
this close experience
with my own mortality,
it got me extremely
interested in what
exactly happens
at the process of death.
How do we handle it?
How do we prepare for it?
And that's been a
large part of my focus
for the last three years.
I learned a lot not only during
my bout with stage 4 cancer,
but in the process of healing.
It gave me a
different perception
of the entire
process of evolution.
It made me more
aware that I have
to be more focused on my
state of consciousness
and less focused
on my surroundings.
That it's my state
of consciousness
is what I'm here to work on.
That's why we've all incarnated
is to learn from experiences.
We're here to learn
from personal challenges
and we create our
own challenges.
And we, through trial and
error, we slowly grow.
But once you recognize that, it
really wakens you to the fact
that I am orchestrating
this process.
I even orchestrated the cancer.
I believe I did
create everything.
It was a challenge.
It was an opportunity,
though, also.
Now at the time, I
wasn't looking at that.
But now in retrospect,
I can view it
and know that it was
an opportunity for me
to completely readdress,
to reappraise everything
in my life, to take a
hard look at my own state
of consciousness,
my own priorities,
and to really begin
to focus on my ability
to make it an enlightened
transition, Doing
what many people would
say to be a better person.
But it goes beyond the
being a better person.
It's to be more aware of
your totality of yourself,
so that you can focus on
what is truly important which
is our spiritual consciousness
and trying to remove our fears,
remove the limits we've
created for ourselves,
and really accelerate
our own personal growth.
And it really brings it to
the forefront in your life.
>> Well, one of the issues that
became really important to me
was that I noticed that it
seemed like no matter what
organization I was a part of,
there was always this point
where ego would start
to get involved.
And before long, people
would have these turf wars.
And they were great people.
And they were doing
marvelous work.
And the organizations
were great.
But this dynamic
kept creeping up
over and over and over again.
And I can't say that I was
immune from that either.
I was a part of
that dynamic, too.
Because I had my ways
that I thought were right.
And so what would
happen is after a while,
people would forget the mission.
And they would start
getting absorbed
in these personal dynamics.
So, anyway, I was walking on
the beach one day puzzling
over this question of why it
is that we as human beings
are so prone to this
divisive infighting.
And why it is that
people forget the mission
in the process of that.
And I sort of just tossed that
question out to the universe.
And I wasn't expecting
any kind of an answer.
But all of a sudden, these
words came back to me.
And it simply said
go to your heart.
And I thought, well,
that's pretty generic.
What does that mean?
But I have known in the past
that when that kind of thing
happens, I should probably
pay attention to it.
So that night, I came home.
And when I went to
bed in the evening,
I simply focused
on the area where
my heart is, not the heart
itself is, as a pump,
but more of the
energy center there.
And there were
several things that
began to happen right
away that I noticed.
One was that my mind
became very still, which
was a big thing for me
because normally my mind is
going 100 miles an hour and
thinking all kinds of things.
Sometimes I can't even get
to sleep because of it.
But when I began to
focus on that area,
that stillness happened.
And I thought well
that's interesting.
And I was noticed that
my body got very relaxed,
which I was familiar
with with my work
at the Munroe Institute.
I knew how to do that.
But this seemed
to even deepen it.
And then the third
thing that I noticed
was that my dream
life really began
to emerge very powerfully.
So much so that I began
to write down my dreams.
And began to discover
something that I thought
was really important.
As my dream life began to merge
with my waking life in ways
that I hadn't noticed before.
So that was a very
profound thing for me.
And it set me on a course
that, really, is still
a part of my work today.
This question of how
do we move beyond
this egocentric perspective
of the world in such a way
that we can remember that we're
here for a larger mission.
And what does the heart
have to do with that?
It's been enough time
and enough things
have happened that it's even
a little difficult for me
to know where I was in 2008.
It's been a long time.
Scientists have gone from
thinking virtual reality was
a wild, crazy idea out
on the fringe to being
pretty much in agreement
that that's the way it is.
Because the
experiments that have
been done in the
last decade have all
been pointing to
that as a result.
You can't really explain
them other than saying this
is a virtual reality.
It's reality based
on information,
an information-based reality.
So my model takes
that a step further
and says consciousness
is the computer.
You've probably heard
me say in videos
that the scientists,
now, are the high priests
of Western culture.
The high priests
are the people that
tell everybody else what's
true, what to believe.
So, now, if the scientists
say this is what we found,
everybody nods and says
that's the way it is.
So they form that role,
where 500 or 600 years ago it
was the high priests
of religion that
told everybody what was truth.
So scientists are
our new high priests.
And if the scientists
come on board
and understand the
larger reality,
then everybody else will follow.
But you see the progress
gets faster and faster.
Only 300 years ago, this
was a very rough place
to live on this planet.
It was pretty violent and
pretty tough and pretty uncaring
and a pretty hard existence.
In the last 300
years, we've probably
grown more toward
kinder and gentler
than in the two million
years before that.
So that's a lot of progress.
And that's been made in a
surprisingly short amount
of time.
>> The history of human race the
history of wars and challenge
of conflict, of crisis.
I mean is it not
when you look at it.
Look at our last century--
World War I, World War
II, series of wars.
The thing is that
maybe, just maybe,
that's where the lessons are.
50 million people or
more died in World War II
according to the history books.
But no one really died.
They shifted their consciousness
to another energy body.
Everyone has continued.
No one in the history of
this planet has ever died.
They've continued on and on.
Each time they re-experience
the earth, they've learned more.
They've grown more.
And because we're
immortal, it doesn't
matter how long it takes.
It doesn't matter if it takes
a million years to evolve.
It's all about the
evolution of consciousness.
>> So we have a chance, now,
with the internet who can net
all of these little bubbles
of enlightenment you might say
that have perked up through
our culture and other cultures.
It gives us a little
more force now.
We have a better understanding.
The evolution of
consciousness is
toward lower entropy which leads
you to where we're all going.
And this evolution
is toward love,
toward cooperation,
compassion, caring.
That's the future.
That's where we're
evolving toward.
Now, you read the
papers and it doesn't
look like we've gotten
too close to that.
We're a bit far from that.
If we can gather enough
force, enough people, that
understand the
nature of reality,
that will change pretty quickly.
>> Bob Monroe, the founder
of this organization,
always thought that things
like the internet were
the materialistic reflection of
the interconnection of people.
And today we live
in a world where
you can pick up your
portable mobile phone
and talk to anybody in the
world, any place on the planet,
whenever you want to.
I'm old enough to know
stories about when
the telephone was invented.
And people would say why
do I need a telephone?
Well, because you can pick up
and call your farmer friends
down the way.
Well, if I want
to talk to them, I
don't even like them
very much, why would I
want to call them on the phone?
I'll just hop on the
horse and ride over there.
Why would I need a telephone?
There is an understanding
in today's culture
growing up that
interconnectedness of humanity
is how it is.
Hasn't it always been that way?
So when we make that
flip to this thing we're
calling the evolved
consciousness,
will we say, oh, well,
it's always been this way.
I've always understood
the world this way
and the interconnectedness
of humankind
and hasn't everybody
always known this?
>> We are evolving vastly from
an informational standpoint.
But I think we've
got a long way to go
from a relational standpoint.
People are so fascinated
with electronics.
And there's this idea
that somehow we're
in constant relationship with
people through our electronics.
But I think that there's a
big difference between sitting
with somebody and
talking face-to-face
and heart to heart with them
as opposed to texting or email.
You can't even begin to
create the same space
or the same nuance.
Body language is completely
stripped out of the equation.
And people think that
is real relationship.
And what happens
is people think,
well, I'm in a relationship.
Why do I feel so lonely?
Why do I feel so isolated?
I've got all this texting.
I've got a Snapchat.
I've got selfies and everything.
But there's a deep
part of us that
knows that something is
atrophying in that process.
For me, there is nothing like
being able to sit down and have
a chat with somebody.
To me, that's the stuff of life.
That's where things
really happen.
But what happens
through electronics
is we have these
truncated conversations.
And it gets stripped down to
its barest informational aspect.
I just don't think that there's
any substitute for human
to human contact.
>> It often comes up to say that
this interconnectedness that I
talk about with technology can
be looked at through one lens
and say ah, but it's actually
separating people from one
another.
What about that personal bonding
and the personal experiences
and dinner with the family?
Where now they're all sitting
around texting each other.
Isn't that a disconnect?
And yet, I think the key word
is the technology is a step.
It is part of this evolution,
an awakening of a notion.
We'll move past this to
where it isn't so dependent.
It'll be a very interesting
movement past this
because there will be
times when people will
understand they're connected.
Just because it's
different than what
we think of usually as
personal connectedness
and having one-on-one or
a group of friends that
are best buddies forever,
just because it's different
than that doesn't mean
there isn't a connection
in a different way, in a way
that we've never had before,
in a way to know that that
person is always there for me
whether or not I've seen
them in a year or two.
I mean just in our
recent history,
when people would travel to
other parts of the world,
whether it was in some
sort of conflict situation
or on vacation, it
would be weeks and weeks
and weeks or months when
you were out of connection
with them.
I mean just traveling by
wagon around the United States
was a problem.
You might be gone
for a year or two.
If you sailed a ship
across the seas.
Whatever happened to so and so?
I don't know it was 10 years
ago when they sailed off.
And so there's a different
form of connectivity now.
>> When you think of the
heart, when we in our normal
conversation, when we talk
about things that are really
important, inevitably,
unconsciously,
we bring in the heart.
For instance, if
we're going to have
a really great conversation,
a deep conversation,
with somebody, we
don't say that we're
going to have a brain
to brain with them.
We say we're going to have a
heart to heart conversation
with them.
Or, if you're going
to talk in a way
that it's going to
communicate with an audience,
we tell somebody to
speak from the heart.
We even connect
the issues of soul
to it, because we talk
about heart and soul
as being sort of a union there.
In many ways, we have overlooked
this relational specialty
of the heart, because
unlike the brain that
likes to slice and dice
and categorize everything
into these very
strict categories that
are based on nouns, it's
the heart that seems
to know about relationships.
And it's the heart that
starts to develop whenever
we're talking about things that
are really important to us.
The mind itself cannot
take you beyond the mind.
But we have to get
to the point where
we make that grand
evolutionary leap, where
we go beyond the mind and
really be our true self
existing in that ethereal,
magnificent state
of pure light, pure
love, pure beingness.
>> As Gandhi said, be the change
you want to see in the world.
It's not a matter of thinking.
I think we are on a trajectory
to grow up as a species,
evolve the quality
of our consciousness,
and that when we do
that, we will live in
a much nicer, kinder,
gentler place.
We will learn to cooperate.
>> Where would you
put developing souls
or consciousness that needs to
develop the skills of a truly
mature, evolved, spiritually
evolved, highly evolved soul?
One that would do no harm.
One that would
project only goodness.
One that would project
only positives or at least
neutrals into everyone
in your environment.
Where would you put
these developing souls
in consciousness while they're
in their developmental stage?
Would you not place them
into a nice dense environment
where they can do no harm?
Would you not place them
in a kindergarten of matter
that is so dense,
so incredibly dense,
that our thoughts don't
manifest instantly?
Why?
It's perfect though.
It's a slowed down environment
where you put the developing
souls that are learning the
skills of an evolved soul,
an evolved state of
consciousness that
must take 100% responsibility
for every thought,
word, and deed.
>> We're kind of been isolated
on this planet to limit
the damage that we can do I
can't help but think that when
we move through this stage--
and I do think it's a stage.
And it's been a very
important stage.
And so even though I've
talked about moving beyond it,
I don't want to
give the impression
that what has happened has
not been necessary, because it
has been absolutely necessary.
This development of the
individualized sense of self
is important, because it
gives us a unique perspective
on the universe.
As we learn to
moderate that, I think
we will become less dangerous
to ourselves and to the planet
and to other people.
And when that happens,
there's a part of me
that suspects maybe
we'll be asked
to be a part of a much larger
sense of being that may
be beyond this planet alone.
But we're not
ready for that yet.
>> Far back as I remember,
like two or three years old up
to the present time, it's been
a continual growth of lowering
entropy, of learning,
figuring things out.
And no doubt sometimes I
gain some entropy, too,
from time to time.
But it's generally been a
lowering of entropy, a bigger
understanding.
Some of us are devolving
because we get so wrapped up
in our preoccupation with
how can we use people and use
things rather than what we give?
But, mostly, that's why
the whole thing evolves
is because the average
level of entropy
goes down as time goes on.
See love is about
other, not about self.
The opposite of love is fear.
And that's all about self.
What about me?
And love is what about you?
What can I do for you?
So a cooperative environment,
rather than a grabby one
or a self-centered one.
>> Christ said love one another.
Bob Monroe said the
only way to know
is to find out for
yourself or have fun.
The Buddha by certain wisdoms.
I don't know have anything
spectacular to say
that haven't been given by
similar people of thinking.
I would rather be remembered
for how I treated other people
rather than what I say.
That seems to count.
>> You hear people sometimes
claim that they are enlightened
and that this is
their last time here.
I'm out of this cycle
of reincarnation.
I am an enlightened person
and I'm going on other things.
When you hear someone declare
that they're enlightened,
it's almost a certain
sign that they are not.
That doesn't sound to me
like that's about other,
that that's about caring.
It sounds to me like
that's about them.
You can always find
something to do here.
something to give.
There's always
somebody that needs
help, that needs encouragement.
There's always new
consciousness coming
in at the bottom of this
system that needs to evolve.
So there is no end.
The system itself
is still evolving.
It's not a fixed system.
It's not like you get to
the top and the bell rings,
and you know you're done.
The top's changing continually.
And there's always
some way to give back.
>> I do think that it is this
process of discovering how we
begin to not be so limited by
the individual sense of self,
that we learn to open the
heart, and that we learn to move
in such a way that we are
in concert with the world,
in concert with other people,
in concert with the evolution
of humanity, and in concert with
the evolution of the planet,
and beyond.
>> Whether or not you understand
anything about the nature
of consciousness or the way
reality works is not really
important.
Whether you ever do anything
paranormal, not important.
What's important is
that you change yourself
to lower your entropy,
move toward being caring,
make it about other, increase
your capacity to love.
That's really important.
And why is that
important to you?
Because that will
change your whole life.
That will change your world.
Most of us struggle
throughout our lives.
We struggle with everybody.
We try real hard
to make everything
be the way we want it to be.
We struggle with
our relationships.
We struggle with our spouses.
We struggle with our children.
We struggle with the boss.
We struggle with the coworkers.
Everything we'd like to
rearrange it or make it such
that it suits us better.
What that does is
makes us miserable.
It frustrates us.
It gets us upset, because you
can't rearrange everything
to be the way you want it.
And we want more and more
stuff because we think
the stuff will make us happy.
We think the stuff is going
to give us a better life.
And you find out that
this stuff is irrelevant.
It doesn't matter how
much stuff you have,
that the real value in this
life is the relationships.
It's people you know.
It's really what you can
give not what you can take.
>> Basically, just stopping
to be aware, to be present.
Don't get into the Wicked
Witch of the West territory,
then to help other people do
that to realize who they are.
Ah, that's exciting to me.
So have I evolved?
I don't know.
But I'd like to think I'm
using the tools better,
more consciously.
There's a wonderful
thing my mom used to say.
The older I get, the more
like myself I become.
>> As far as evolution goes, we
are evolving with no endpoint.
We are on this amazing,
exciting journey
of consciousness that
continues to infinity,
as far as I could imagine.
>> Skip Atwater has
this wonderful saying.
He says you can't not
be on the right path.
And I think it's really true.
We each have come
into this world
because we come from a
different consciousness.
And there's something
that we are learning here
in this direct
experience, in this
what we call waking
consciousness,
but what a lot of
people would actually
would call it sleeping
consciousness,
because we're not really
aware in this world.
No matter what happens,
we are learning something.
And we're being changed
in really dramatic ways
that I think then we take
back to the existence we had
before we came into this world.
>> And there you have it.
And I do hope you enjoyed it.
Sometimes, these take
listening more than once
to fully understand it.
Thank you.
[WAVES CRASHING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]